+++
title = "Autoincrement ID Support in SQLAlchemy"
description = "Autoincrement ID Support in SQLAlchemy library for Python in MySQL."
date = "2023-02-22"
updated = "2024-08-16"
[extra]
social_media_card = "/images/posts/sqlalchemy-autoincrement.webp"


[taxonomies]
tags=["python", "databases", "python3", "database-design", "sqlalchemy"]
categories=["python", "databases"]
+++

## Introduction

When working with a database, creating tables with unique identifiers for each row is often necessary. One way to do this is by using autoincrement IDs. SQLAlchemy, a popular Python SQL toolkit, provides built-in support for autoincrement IDs. In this blog post, we'll explore how to use autoincrement IDs in SQLAlchemy schema definitions and inserts.

## Defining a Table with an Autoincrement ID

To define a table with an autoincrement ID in SQLAlchemy, we can use the `Column` class with the `primary_key` and `autoincrement` arguments. Here's an example:

```python
from sqlalchemy import Column, Integer, String
from sqlalchemy.ext.declarative import declarative_base

Base = declarative_base()

class User(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'users'
    id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True, autoincrement=True)
    name = Column(String)
```

In this example, we define a `User` table with an `id` column that is an `Integer` type, is the `primary_key`, and has `autoincrement` enabled. We also define a `name` column that is a `String` type.

## Inserting Data with an Autoincrement ID

To insert data into a table with an autoincrement ID, we don't need to specify a value for the `id` column. SQLAlchemy will automatically generate an ID for us. Here's an example:

```python
from sqlalchemy import create_engine
from sqlalchemy.orm import sessionmaker

engine = create_engine('sqlite:///example.db')
Session = sessionmaker(bind=engine)
session = Session()

user = User(name='John Doe')
session.add(user)
session.commit()

print(user.id) # Output: 1
```

In this example, we first create an `engine` object that connects to an SQLite database file. We then create a `Session` object from the `sessionmaker` function and use it to create a new `User` object with a `name` of 'John Doe.' We add the user to the session and commit the changes. Finally, we printed the `id` of the user, which is automatically generated by SQLAlchemy and is equal to 1.

## Conclusion

Autoincrement IDs are a convenient way to create unique identifiers for each row in a database table. In SQLAlchemy, we can easily define a table with an autoincrement ID by using the `Column` class with the `primary_key` and `autoincrement` arguments. When inserting data into a table with an autoincrement ID, we don't need to specify a value for the `id` column. SQLAlchemy will automatically generate an ID for us. With these tools, we can quickly create robust and scalable database applications in Python.
